# A minimalist NodeJS/Express/MongoDB boilerplate for REST APIs

Used for my own dev purposes

## Get started

1. Clone repo
2. Create .env file with
   - PORT (3000)
   - MONGODB_URL
   - JWT_SECRET
   - JWT_ACCESS_EXPIRATION_MINUTES (30)
   - JWT_REFRESH_EXPIRATION_DAYS (30)
   - JWT_RESET_PASSWORD_EXPIRATION_MINUTES (10)
   - JWT_VERIFY_EMAIL_EXPIRATION_MINUTES (10)
3. Run `npm run install`
4. Create a database at [MongoDB](https://cloud.mongodb.com/)


## Project structure

```
src\
 |--config\         # Environment variables and configuration related things
 |--controllers\    # Route controllers (controller layer)
 |--docs\           # Swagger files
 |--middlewares\    # Custom express middlewares
 |--models\         # Mongoose models (data layer)
 |--routes\         # Routes
 |--services\       # Business logic (service layer)
 |--utils\          # Utility classes and functions
 |--validations\    # Request data validation schemas
 |--app.js          # Express app
 |--index.js        # App entry point
```

## API Documentation

To view the list of available APIs and their specifications, run the server and go to `http://localhost:3000/v1/docs` in your browser. This documentation page is automatically generated using the [swagger](https://swagger.io/) definitions written as comments in the route files.

### API Endpoints

List of available routes:

**Auth routes**:\
`POST /v1/auth/register` - register\
`POST /v1/auth/login` - login\
`POST /v1/auth/refresh-tokens` - refresh auth tokens\
`POST /v1/auth/forgot-password` - send reset password email\
`POST /v1/auth/reset-password` - reset password\
`POST /v1/auth/send-verification-email` - send verification email\
`POST /v1/auth/verify-email` - verify email

**User routes**:\
`POST /v1/users` - create a user\
`GET /v1/users` - get all users\
`GET /v1/users/:userId` - get user\
`PATCH /v1/users/:userId` - update user\
`DELETE /v1/users/:userId` - delete user

## Error Handling

The app has a centralized error handling mechanism.

Controllers should try to catch the errors and forward them to the error handling middleware (by calling `next(error)`). For convenience, you can also wrap the controller inside the catchAsync utility wrapper, which forwards the error.

```javascript
const catchAsync = require('../utils/catchAsync');
const controller = catchAsync(async (req, res) => {
  // this error will be forwarded to the error handling middleware
  throw new Error('Something wrong happened');
});
```

The error handling middleware sends an error response, which has the following format:

```json
{
  "code": 404,
  "message": "Not found"
}
```

When running in development mode, the error response also contains the error stack.

The app has a utility ApiError class to which you can attach a response code and a message, and then throw it from anywhere (catchAsync will catch it).

For example, if you are trying to get a user from the DB who is not found, and you want to send a 404 error, the code should look something like:

```javascript
const httpStatus = require('http-status');
const ApiError = require('../utils/ApiError');
const User = require('../models/User');
const getUser = async (userId) => {
  const user = await User.findById(userId);
  if (!user) {
    throw new ApiError(httpStatus.NOT_FOUND, 'User not found');
  }
};
```

## Validation

Request data is validated using [Joi](https://joi.dev/). Check the [documentation](https://joi.dev/api/) for more details on how to write Joi validation schemas.

The validation schemas are defined in the `src/validations` directory and are used in the routes by providing them as parameters to the `validate` middleware.

```javascript
const express = require('express');
const validate = require('../../middlewares/validate');
const userValidation = require('../../validations/user.validation');
const userController = require('../../controllers/user.controller');
const router = express.Router();
router.post('/users', validate(userValidation.createUser), userController.createUser);
```

## Authentication

To require authentication for certain routes, you can use the `auth` middleware.

```javascript
const express = require('express');
const auth = require('../../middlewares/auth');
const userController = require('../../controllers/user.controller');
const router = express.Router();
router.post('/users', auth(), userController.createUser);
```

These routes require a valid JWT access token in the Authorization request header using the Bearer schema. If the request does not contain a valid access token, an Unauthorized (401) error is thrown.

**Generating Access Tokens**:

An access token can be generated by making a successful call to the register (`POST /v1/auth/register`) or login (`POST /v1/auth/login`) endpoints. The response of these endpoints also contains refresh tokens (explained below).

An access token is valid for 30 minutes. You can modify this expiration time by changing the `JWT_ACCESS_EXPIRATION_MINUTES` environment variable in the .env file.

**Refreshing Access Tokens**:

After the access token expires, a new access token can be generated, by making a call to the refresh token endpoint (`POST /v1/auth/refresh-tokens`) and sending along a valid refresh token in the request body. This call returns a new access token and a new refresh token.

A refresh token is valid for 30 days. You can modify this expiration time by changing the `JWT_REFRESH_EXPIRATION_DAYS` environment variable in the .env file.

## Authorization

The `auth` middleware can also be used to require certain rights/permissions to access a route.

```javascript
const express = require('express');
const auth = require('../../middlewares/auth');
const userController = require('../../controllers/user.controller');
const router = express.Router();
router.post('/users', auth('manageUsers'), userController.createUser);
```

In the example above, an authenticated user can access this route only if that user has the `manageUsers` permission.

The permissions are role-based. You can view the permissions/rights of each role in the `src/config/roles.js` file.

If the user making the request does not have the required permissions to access this route, a Forbidden (403) error is thrown.

## Logging

Import the logger from `src/config/logger.js`. It is using the [Winston](https://github.com/winstonjs/winston) logging library.

Logging should be done according to the following severity levels (ascending order from most important to least important):

```javascript
const logger = require('<path to src>/config/logger');
logger.error('message'); // level 0
logger.warn('message'); // level 1
logger.info('message'); // level 2
logger.http('message'); // level 3
logger.verbose('message'); // level 4
logger.debug('message'); // level 5
```

In development mode, log messages of all severity levels will be printed to the console.

In production mode, only `info`, `warn`, and `error` logs will be printed to the console.\
In production mode, `error` logs will be stored in the MongoDB under the 'log' collection.\

This app uses pm2 in production mode, which is configured to store the logs in log files.

Note: API request information (request url, response code, timestamp, etc.) are also automatically logged (using [morgan](https://github.com/expressjs/morgan)).

## Custom Mongoose Plugins

The app also contains 2 custom mongoose plugins that you can attach to any mongoose model schema. You can find the plugins in `src/models/plugins`.

```javascript
const mongoose = require('mongoose');
const { toJSON, paginate } = require('./plugins');
const userSchema = mongoose.Schema(
  {
    /* schema definition here */
  },
  { timestamps: true }
);
userSchema.plugin(toJSON);
userSchema.plugin(paginate);
const User = mongoose.model('User', userSchema);
```

### toJSON

The toJSON plugin applies the following changes in the toJSON transform call:

- removes \_\_v, createdAt, updatedAt, and any schema path that has private: true
- replaces \_id with id

### paginate

The paginate plugin adds the `paginate` static method to the mongoose schema.

Adding this plugin to the `User` model schema will allow you to do the following:

```javascript
const queryUsers = async (filter, options) => {
  const users = await User.paginate(filter, options);
  return users;
};
```

The `filter` param is a regular mongo filter.

The `options` param can have the following (optional) fields:

```javascript
const options = {
  sortBy: 'name:desc', // sort order
  limit: 5, // maximum results per page
  page: 2, // page number
};
```

The plugin also supports sorting by multiple criteria (separated by a comma): `sortBy: name:desc,role:asc`

The `paginate` method returns a Promise, which fulfills with an object having the following properties:

```json
{
  "results": [],
  "page": 2,
  "limit": 5,
  "totalPages": 10,
  "totalResults": 48
}
```

## Linting

Linting is done using [ESLint](https://eslint.org/) and [Prettier](https://prettier.io).

In this app, ESLint is configured to follow the [Airbnb JavaScript style guide](https://github.com/airbnb/javascript/tree/master/packages/eslint-config-airbnb-base) with some modifications. It also extends [eslint-config-prettier](https://github.com/prettier/eslint-config-prettier) to turn off all rules that are unnecessary or might conflict with Prettier.

To modify the ESLint configuration, update the `.eslintrc.json` file. To modify the Prettier configuration, update the `.prettierrc.json` file.

To prevent a certain file or directory from being linted, add it to `.eslintignore` and `.prettierignore`.

To maintain a consistent coding style across different IDEs, the project contains `.editorconfig`
